At least 23 million impacted by quake, WHO warns

The number of people affected across Turkey and Syria following two huge earthquakes could be 23 million or higher, according to preliminary assessments by the World Health Organization (WHO). Dr Margaret Harris tells BBC World Service's Newshour that "many, many hospitals just do not have what they need to function, simple things like power".

Commenting on fears the death toll could rise even further, she warns "until you've cleared all the damage, you don't know how many people have died".

People searching the wreckage of a hospital in Iskenderun, Turkey

The ruins of a hospital in Iskenderun, Turkey, one of many health facilities badly damagedImage caption: The ruins of a hospital in Iskenderun, Turkey, one of many health facilities badly damaged
She adds: "Unfortunately, unless we get care to people as quickly as possible, you will get people who become very ill in the medium and long term as a result of what they experienced on that terrible night."Beyond the immediate work of helping the physically injured, there will need to be a focus on supporting those who have lost relatives or seen their homes destroyed, Dr Harris says.She continues: "They are so deeply traumatised that the effects on them could be very long term if they do not get very good psychosocial support."

Dr Harris says access to northern Syria for health workers, where territory is held variously by different warring factions, is the WHO's "number one need".

'Catastrophic humanitarian needs' emerging in Turkey and Syria
The International Rescue Committee (IRC) has warned of "catastrophic humanitarian needs" in both Turkey and Syria. It said electricity across the affected area remains intermittent. There have been some small improvements in Turkey but in northern Syria many areas are still off the grid, with mobile and internet outages making the response and coordination even more difficult.

Gas supplies are also severely affected, meaning that even if people can return home they will have to endure freezing temperatures.

“With the response in its infancy the need for humanitarian aid is stark. Roads and infrastructure, like bridges, have been damaged meaning it will likely prove challenging to get supplies to those who need it most," the IRC warned.


Mexico sends its famed search dogs

A member of one of Mexico's urban search and rescue teams with his dog
Mexico, a country which is prone to earthquakes, is sending a group of 16 of its search and rescue dogs to Turkey. The dogs won the hearts of Mexicans when they combed through the rubble of the earthquake which hit Mexico City and nearby regions in 2017, killing hundreds of people.

The most famous of them, Frida, a Golden Labrador Retriever wearing protective goggles and booties who saved 12 people during her career, died of old age three months ago. But some of the experienced dogs which worked alongside Frida in 2017 are part of the team, such as Ecko.

Ecko, a Mexican Navy search and rescue dog
Mexican NavyCopyright: Mexican Navy
Ecko is part of the team flying to TurkeyImage caption: Ecko is part of the team flying to Turkey
Mexico's Foreign Minister Marcelo Ebrard tweeted photos of the canines lying on the tarmac just before take-off.

'We have to focus on the living': Rescuers' desperate efforts to find survivors in Antakya
Quentin Sommerville Reporting from Antakya, southern Turkey

The dead lie on the pavements in Antakya - a daughter and a father on one side of the street, half a dozen family members on the other. Under colourful blankets, they wait for collection. Hours pass by and still they remain, as ambulances and rescue workers stream past. In this devastated city, where the destruction is measured not by building, but by city blocks, the priority is those who can still be saved. I join a group of men working on one building. Like apartment blocks here, it has been pancaked flat, its six floors concertinaing into a single pile of rubble. It’s hard to climb up, my feet slip on bathroom tiles that now make up the floor, exposed steel rebar the only grips to make it to the top.

They won't give their names, and say only that they were family members of the building’s residents and had come from Istanbul to search for their relatives. They're armed with pickaxes and crow bars, determination and hope.

Rubble in Antakya
BBCCopyright: BBC
“We heard a voice 10 minutes ago,” one man with a sledgehammer says. He sets to work, calling occasionally for passers-by and traffic to quieten in case voices could be heard. Soon they find two people trapped together, a man and a young girl. The men work with renewed energy and care to get to them, then ask official rescuers with power tools to come help.

But the tools are never used. “They’re already dead,” the official says, “we have to concentrate on the living.” Still the men keep digging until the bodies are retrieved.

There’s anger too that there isn’t more help. “They came and took pictures, but no rescuers returned,” says one woman. Eleven people were trapped in the building belonging to her boyfriend’s family - for hours, they could hear voices, but now only silence.

It will soon be 48 hours since the first earthquake hit and the chance of finding people alive slips away with each passing hour. But as the sun sets across Antakya, the sound of pickaxes and crowbars hitting concrete echoes across the city.

Before and after images of earthquake zone
David Brown

BBC News Visual Journalism Team

Images coming in from the cities hit by Monday's earthquake show areas of complete devastation.The epicentre of the first quake at 04:18 local time (01:18 GMT) was near Gaziantep in Turkey.

Some apartment blocks in the city, which is home to more than two million people, have been totally flattened.

Images taken before and after the earthquake showing an apartment block in the Turkish city of Gaziantep completely flattened.

Turkey's President Recep Tayyip Erdogan has declared a three-month state of emergency in Gaziantep and nine other cities.

Among them is the Mediterranean port city of Iskenderun, in the southern province of Hatay, where buildings and docks have been reduced to rubble.

Images from before and after the earthquake in the Mediterranean port city of Iskenderun show buildings reduced to rubble and residents waiting for help out on the street.

On Tuesday, the sky above Iskerendun was black with smoke after hundreds of shipping containers at the city's port facility caught fire.

It is thought that more than 1,200 buildings have been destroyed by the earthquake in Hatay province alone.Iskerendun is one of two major container ports on Turkey's south-east coast.

'The hospital was collapsing with my son inside'
Lina Shaikhouni

Ismael Alrij and Mustafa
Ismael Alrij and MustafaImage caption: Ismael Alrij and Mustafa
We're hearing stories from Syrian people who were caught up in the earthquakes that hit neighbouring south-eastern Turkey on Monday.

Ismael Alrij had just left his six-year-old son, Mustafa, in the hospital when the ground started to violently shake. Watching the building in al-Dana, north-western Syria, start to fall apart, Ismael could only fear the worst.

"As the earthquake got stronger," Ismael tells me over a patchy WhatsApp connection, "the power went out and the entrance to the hospital, which was made from glass, started shattering.

"It was like a doomsday scenario," he says, adding he began to imagine having to rescue his son from the rubble.

But a minute later, Mustafa emerged, running towards him, screaming and crying. He had ripped out his own drip, and blood was oozing from his arm.

WATCH: Girl rescued from destroyed building
As we've been reporting, rescuers are scrambling to save people trapped beneath the rubble after thousands of buildings collapsed in Monday's earthquakes in Turkey and Syria.

This girl was pulled to safety by firefighters, from the ruins of a building in Hatay province in Turkey.

UK sending search and rescue specialists to Turkey
Earlier today, development minister Andrew Mitchell told Sky News that although Britain's aid budget is "under very considerable strain," resources will still be found as some of the budget is "always" carved out to cope with humanitarian crises.

"That is what people in Britain expect us to do. Britain is always there first and in strength to help when these appalling catastrophes take place. And we will be there this time," Mitchell said. The UK government has sent a team of 76 search and rescue specialists to Turkey to help search for survivors.

People in the UK rally to help earthquake survivors A collection is under way at Meyrick Park Cafe in Bournemouth
BBCCopyright: BBC
Communities from across the south of England are rallying together to offer help to those affected by the earthquake in Turkey and Syria.

More than 5,000 people have been killed in the 7.8 magnitude quake that hit both countries on Monday. Donations and help are being sent by groups in Dorset and Berkshire while nine firefighters from the Hampshire & Isle of Wight Fire and Rescue Service have also been deployed to Turkey.

A collection is under way at Meyrick Park Cafe in Bournemouth. Residents have been asked to donate blankets, food, sanitary products and clothes for people of all ages. All items will be collected by 3pm today before being transported to Turkey on a cargo flight.




Turkish nationals fly home to join rescue mission
Alice Cuddy

Reporting from Adana, southern Turkey

Erkan
Erkan has travelled from Qatar to get to his home in Hatay near the Syrian border
We've made it to Adana in southern Turkey, where many are now continuing onward journeys to search for loved ones.

Erkan has travelled from Qatar, where he works, to get to his home in Hatay near the Syrian border. He said he feels lucky that his wife and two children were not injured in the earthquake, but their home has been badly damaged. "My home is broken. We have nowhere to live. My family will live outside now," he tells me.

He has been unable to connect with friends and family members on the phone, but has been following updates on social media. "That's how we know who's dead, who's injured," he says.
He now plans to join the search to find those missing in his community.

Ships diverted as Turkey port fire spreads
Smoke rising over Iskenderun Port in Turkey
ReutersCopyright: Reuters
Ships bound for the earthquake disaster zone in Turkey are being diverted because of severe fire damage to a port.

The Iskenderun facility, which lies about 70 miles (112km) south-west of Gaziantep, has been burning since yesterday. Pictures from the scene show a dense column of smoke rising above the port and fire engulfing several containers.

Earlier today, the BBC's Quentin Sommerville said the air around the port was "still thick with black smoke and the smell of burning petrol".

Fires burning at Iskenderun Port in Turkey
ReutersCopyright: Reuters
He continued: "It’s been burning since yesterday when the earthquake hit, toppling shipping containers and setting the port on fire."

Major shipping firm AP Moller Maersk said in a statement it wasn't clear when it would return to normal operations and that cargo is being diverted to other ports in Turkey, as well as Port Said in Egypt.

With roads and airports damaged, the damage will add to the complex logistical problems government and aid agencies face in trying to get aid and supplies to the area.

WATCH: Children rescued from Syria earthquake ruins
Footage has emerged from Syria of search teams discovering two children among the ruins, in separate rescues in Aleppo and Idlib. Emergency teams are racing to save people trapped beneath the rubble after thousands of buildings collapsed in both Turkey and Syria.

Unanswered cries as survivors wait for help

Tom Bateman Reporting from Adana

A view shows a collapsed building following an earthquake in Hatay province, Turkey
ReutersCopyright: Reuters
The sense of loss is spreading more quickly than the search for survivors.

On the Turkish border with Syria, more news came in overnight from Hatay province, one of the worst hit regions. In the darkness, footage showed a resident searching in the rubble. He believes someone is alive underneath. "Speak out loud," he pleads. "As you see, there is a dead body here. He is dead and nobody has removed him. And a woman's voice is heard from underneath."

As he speaks a woman's voice cries out from the rubble. She cries again, and then bangs on metal trying to hold the man's attention. But there is nothing he alone can do. An entire home is collapsed and it will take machinery to lift the ruins. This is a story of unanswered cries, being repeated over and over again across this region.

Freezing nights to affect earthquake-hit region
As we reported earlier, the weather is due to have an impact on those left without shelter, with overnight temperatures set to dip below freezing. BBC Weather presenter Nick Miller has the latest forecast for the area.

Video caption: BBC Weather report: Freezing nights to hit Turkey and Syria regionBBC Weather report: Freezing nights to hit Turkey and Syria region

What's been happening?
If you're just joining us, or need a catch up, here's the latest from Turkey and Syria: More than 5,000 people... have died across both countries following yesterday's 7.8-magnitude earthquake and subsequent 7.5 tremor, which both hit south-eastern Turkey near its border with neighbouring Syria The combined death toll... is expected to keep rising as the now-international search and rescue mission continues

Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan... has declared 10 cities in the south of his country as disaster zones and said there'll be a three-month state of emergency in each due to the damage caused. He also thanked the 70 countries who've sent and offered help, including the US, UK and South Korea

A South Korean international rescue team checks their equipment before heading to Turkey
Voices from the rubble... are being amplified by journalists and concerned loved ones, including one Istanbul-based reporter who told us he was receiving voice notes from people trapped under collapsed buildings Millions will be affected... by the quakes, according to the World Health Organisation (WHO), who earlier warned as many as 23 million Turkish and Syrian people will suffer some form of consequences. This includes over a million children, officials said Despite freezing weather... rescue teams are continuing to search for survivors

Stay with us for the latest updates and analysis from our correspondents on the ground.

EU mobilises rescue workers, detection dogs and emergency supplies

Jessica Parker

Reporting from Brussels

Members of the Dutch search and rescue team USAR arrive at Eindhoven Air Base, the Netherlands
Dutch rescue teams are heading to TurkeyImage caption: Dutch rescue teams are heading to Turkey The EU says it’s now mobilised more than 30 search and rescue or medical teams to send to Turkey. They’re being provided by 19 member states - plus Montenegro and Albania. In total that will mean more than 1,200+ rescue workers heading to the affected areas and 70 detection dogs. A spokesman said that 11 teams were already on the ground while others were “gradually arriving.”

Syria presents a more complicated situation – with control in the north divided between the government and rebel groups. Brussels also does not recognise Bashar al-Assad as a legitimate head of state and has imposed sanctions on the regime – with only low-level contacts between Damascus and Brussels.

And, unlike Turkey, Syria has not asked for help under the EU’s civil protection mechanism.“To make sure that teams are able to work effectively on the ground, it’s absolutely indispensable that we not only have authorisation but the support of authorities there on the ground,” said the European Commission’s chief spokesman Eric Mamer. “If that isn’t the case it’s impossible for teams to work in an effective and safe way.” The EU says it’s providing aid to Syria through existing humanitarian and NGO networks – including the supply of water, sanitation, blankets and shelter.


State of emergency declared in Turkey
A man and digger search through rubble in Hatay

Turkey's president has declared a three month state of emergency in the south-east of the country after the official death toll climbed again.

Recep Tayyip Erdogan said the number of confirmed fatalities in Turkey alone has risen to 3,549, up by 130. He said there are 10 cities within the earthquake disaster zone and confirmed his government has received offers of help from 70 countries around the world.

Map showing locations of Monday's earthquakes
President Erdogan also announced plans to utilise hotels in Antalya as emergency shelters for people left homeless by the earthquake. The resort on Turkey's south-west coast is a popular tourist destination for holidaymakers from across Europe. Since 04:17am yesterday, people across Turkey have barely slept. Over 13 million people across 10 cities have been affected by the biggest quake the country has witnessed since 1939.

The scale of the disaster is beyond the nation’s worst nightmare. People have been glued to their television screens and their mobile phones, trying to get a hold of the latest news and to figure out how they can offer some sort of help.

When I told my mother I was going to be deployed to Maras, the epicentre of both the earthquakes, she called me back a second later, asking me in tears to make some donation on her behalf.

Map showing area impacted by the earthquakes
Pictures emerging from airports in Istanbul show the desperation. Hundreds gathered to make their way to the quake zone as volunteers. Others are trying to organise help on social media, keen to determine what people in the region urgently need.

There is also frustration. Why hasn’t the government listened to the warnings of the geology experts? Knowing a major quake would hit the country sooner or later, why haven’t they taken enough precautions to strengthen the buildings - and why have they been slow in allowing the miners or the troops to take part in the rescue operations, many ask.